> Reminder: "You can use the contents of this file while taking the midterm and final exam."

> Reminder: "⚠ IMPORTANT: It is a prerequisite for all deliverables that you have at least 10 commits evenly spread across the assignment period for the deliverable."

# GitHub & Git

Git provides:

1. "version tracking in a repository"
2. "the ability to clone a copy of the repository to a different location"

The **"push"** command sends local changes up to the GitHub repository so both are in sync.  The **"pull"** command allows for others to pull down commits into their local repositories.  The **"fetch"** command give you the most recent information on GitHub without modifying your local repository.  The **"status"** command shows differences between clones and any missing commits.  

## forking
- "A fork is similar to cloning a repository to your development environment, but it clones to GitHub instead."
* "GitHub allows you to create a fork of any repository on GitHub. You just push the Fork button from the repository's GitHub page. You can then make modifications to the repository fork and push the changes as a pull request."


# The Console
## Command Line Crash Course Info

CLI tools: command line interface tools

CMD: the command prompt

WSL: Windows Subsystem for Linux

Terminal: "a software that starts and connects to a shell"

Shell: "your session and session environment"

The Command Line: "the literal line where you enter commands and the cursor blinks"

### Some Useful commands
- cd: move around directory
- ls: list a directory's contents
- pwd: show present working directory
- mkdir: make a directory
- touch: create files and modify metadata
- cp: copy files or directories
- mv: move files or directories
- rm: delete files or directories
- curl: download files found at a URL
- grep: search for text
- less, cat: view a file's contents
- awk, tr, sed: transform text

Command options are "modifiers" placed at the end of a command.

### Special Characters
- "|": pass in the command on the left to the command on the right
- ">": redirect output to a file (overwrites)
- ">>" redirect output to a file (creates new, if exists)
### Keyboard Shortcuts
CTRL-R: "use type ahead to find previous commands"

CTRL-C: terminate the current command

# Amazon Web Services - EC2

- "A security group represents the rules for allowing access to your servers. Security group rules specify both the port that is accessible on your server, and the source IP address that requests are allowed from."
- "You can stop your server at any time. Don't confuse this with terminating your server which completely destroys it. Stopping your server just powers down the device."
  > Note that your elastic IP address is allocated until your release it, not until you terminate your instance. So make sure you release it when you no longer need it. Otherwise you will get a nasty $3 bill every month.
  
  how to remote shell into the server:

  >  ssh -i [key pair file] ubuntu@[ip address]

# Amazon Web Services - Route 53

  **DNS**: Domain Name System
  **Route 53**: the AWS service that handles DNS
  **TLD**: Top-level Domain
  **SOA**: Start of authority

  # Caddy

  - "Caddy is a web service that listens for incoming HTTP requests. Caddy then either serves up the requested static files or routes the request to another web service"
  - "ability to route requests is called a gateway, or reverse proxy, and allows you to expose multiple web services (i.e. your project services) as a single external web service (i.e. Caddy)."
  - Caddy handles the creation and rotation of web certificates (HTTPS)
  - Caddy serves all static HTML, CSS, and JavaScript files
  - Caddy acts as a "gateway" for subdomain requests

### Configuration file

  > ~/Caddyfile

### HTML files

> ~/public_html

"The name server (NS) record contains the names of the authoritative name servers that authorize you to place DNS records in this DNS server."

"The start of authority (SOA) record provides contact information about the owner of this domain name."

# HTTPS, TLS, and web certificates

**HTTP** refers to *non-secure hpytext transport protocol*.

*Hypertext Transport Protocol* (HTTPS) is a secure version of HTTP.  Data is encrypted using *Transport Layer Security* (TLS).  *SSL* refers to *Secure Sockets Layer*.

## Web Certificates

- They are generated by a 3rd party using "public/private key encryption"
- Caddy uses *Let's Encrypt"" for web certificates

# CodePen

CodePen is a coding sandbox website allowing for experimental capabilities with HTML, CSS< JavaScript, and React.

**"When working with assignments that use CodePen to submit your work, you will do the following steps:"**
>1. Either create a new pen, or fork an existing example pen.
>2. Conduct the experiment as defined by the assignment.
>3. Save your assignment periodically so that you don't lose any work. In order to keep your CodePen account organized you should consider using pen collections for different technologies.
>4. Submit the pen's URL in Canvas along with a description of some interesting thing that you learned.

# Hypertext Markup Language

HTML is used for website content structre.  It was originally made to be a "publishing format for web documents, or pages."  From there, websites have changed from *singel page applications* (SPAs) to groups of pages that form a multi-page application* (MPA).

**HTML is built using elements and tags**

Some common HTML elements:

- html: the top level page structure
- head: metadata regarding the page and the title
- body: the general content structure
- main: main content structure (not including headers, footers, etc.)

Comments are made in HTML by using "<!--" and "-->".

**"The Visual appearance of the web page won't really change until we start stying the page with CSS"** 

### Attributes

All HTML elements may have attributes.

Example:
> "<p **id="hello"** **class="greeting"**>Hello world</p>"

### Hyperlinks

A hyperlink provides the ability to take you from on page to another.  In HTML, a hyperlink is designated by "an anchor (a) that has an attribute containg the address of the hyperlink reference (href)."

Example:
> "<**a href="https://byu.edu"**>Go to the Y</a>"

### HTML History
- 1990: HTML, format tags
- 1995: HTML2, tables and internationalization
- 1997: HTML3, MathML, CSS, and frame tags
- 1999: HTML4, external CSS
- 2014: HTML5, email, password, media, and semantic tags

# HTML Structure

Common elements for structure in HTML are body, header, footer, main, section, aside, p, table, ol/ul, div, and span.  There are two main types of structural elements in HTML: block and inline.  Block elements are "distinctive blocks" that break the flow of content structure.  Inline elements do not disrupt the flow of a block element's content.

# HTML Input

Some HTML input elements include the following: form, fieldset, input, select, optgroup, option, textarea, label, output, meter.

### Form Element

- The purpose of the form element is "to submit the values of the inputs that it contains."
- You are "not required to have a form element to use input elements."

### Input Element

The input element can include a variety of input types.  Some input element types are: text, password, email, tel, url, number, checkbox, radio, range, date, datetime-local, month, week, color, file, submit.

Input elements share common attributes:

 - **name**: "The name of the input. This is submitted as the name of the input if used in a form"
 - **disabled**: "Disables the ability for the user to interact with the input"
 - **value**: "The initial value of the input"
 - **required**: "Signifies that a value is required in order to be valid"

# HTML Media Elements

Some HTML elements that represent media are: img, audio, video, svg, and canvas.  Some media elemnts use a reference to an external file; a URL may be used as an attribute (relative path or full path e.g. https://images.pexels.com/photos/164170/pexels-photo-164170.jpeg or images/photo.jpg).

### audio
Audio elements require a "src" attribute and may contain a "controls" attribute, an "autoplay" attribute, and a "loop" attribute.

### video
Video elements require a "src" attribute and may contain a "controls" attribute and an "autoplay" attribute.

## svg
Svg elements can be rendered inline with HTML.

# Simon HTML

> "Note that there are placeholders for all of the technologies that we cover in the class. It is vital that you provide this in your Startup HTML version or you will not be able to demonstrate your mastery with each deliverable. This also helps you think about how you are going to include the technologies as they are introduced. This may mean that you have to create mocks or generated data that will be replaced later in your development."

How to Desploy a file:
> './deployFiles.sh -k yourpemkey -h yourdomain -s simon'

# CSS Introduction

CSS helps make the structure of HTML look dynamic and more pleasing to the eye.  It can be used to animate a page, apply different fonts, respond to user actions, and scale the web page to the aspect ratio of different devices.

CSS uses **rulesets**. A rule is made of a **selector** and **declarations**, which represent the **property** to stylize with a given **property value**.  For example, 'p' is the paragraph selector.  A declaration can be made to set 'color', a property of 'p', to a value, such as 'green'; all of this combined is called a CSS rule.

There are 3 methods of associating CSS with HTML

1. "style" **attribute**. The style attribute can be used to explicitly assign one or more declarations.
2. "style" **element**. The style element can be used to define CSS rules to all elements of the document; it typically is included in the head element of the document.
3. "link" element.  The link element cna be used to "create a hyperlink reference to an external file containing CSS rules."  It is required that the link element appears in the head of the document.

> "the link element usually is the preferred way to define CSS"

Note: CSS stycle declarations defined at a lower level will override higher level declarations

## box model

Every element, when styled with CSS, is defined as a box.  "The innermost box holds the element's content. This is where things like the text or image of an element is displayed. Next comes the padding. The padding will inherit things like the background color. After padding is the border, which has properties like color, thickness and line style. The final box is the margin. The margin is considered external to the actual styling of the box and therefore only represents whitespace."

Remember:
> "By default, the width and height of an element is defined by the width and height of the content box. You can change the box-sizing CSS property from the default value of content-box to border-box in order to redefine the width and height to also include the padding and the border. "

## Versions of CSS

1996: CSS1, "selectors, font, color, background, alignment, margin, border, padding"

1998: CSS2, "positioning, z-index, bidirectional text, shadows"

2011: CSS2.1, removal of incompatible features

1999-2021: CSS3, "enhancements for media, box, background, borders, color, template, multi-column, selectors"

# CSS Selectors

## Element selector

| Combinator | Meaning | Example | Description |
----------|---------|--------|--------------|
Descendant| list of descendants| body section | any section that is a descendant of a body|
Child | list of direct children | section > p | any p that is a direct child of a section |
General Sibling | list of siblings | dib ~ p | any p that has a div sibling |
Adjacent Sibling | list of adjacent siblings | div + p | any p that has a adjacent div sibling |

## Class selector

To use a class selector, enter a period followed by the class name.  You may combine the element name and class selectors to only select certain elements within that class.

## ID selector

An ID selector applys CSS stlying to elements with a specified ID.  Enter "#" followed by the ID.

## Attribute selector

"Attribute selectors allow you to select elements based upon their attributes. You use an attribute selector to select any element with a given attribute (a[href]). You can also specify a required value for an attribute (a[href="./fish.png"]) in order for the selector to match"

## Pseudo selector

Pseudo selectors can define CSS "based on positional relationships, mouse interactions, hyperlink visitation states, and attributes."  Enter the elment, then the pseudo selector (e.g. section::border).

# CSS Declarations
when defing the size of a CSS property, there are many units.

Unit | Description
-----|-----------
px | the number of pixels
pt | the number of points (1/72 inch)
in | the number of inches
cm | the number of centimeters
% | the percentage of the parent element
em | a multiplier of the width of the letter 'm' in the parent's font
rem | a multiplier of the width of the letter 'm' in the root's font
ex | a multiplier of the height of the element's font
vw | a percentage of the viewport's width
vh | a percentage of the viewport's height
vmin | a percentage of the viewport's smaller dimension
vmax | a percentage of the viewport's larger dimension

# CSS Fonts

- Use the "font-family" property to define what fonts should be used
- The four main font families are: Serif, Sans-serif, Fixed, and Symbol
- Use the "@font-face" rule to provide the name of a custom font and the source location

# CSS Animation

Animations can be made in CSS by using the "animation" properties and defining "keyframes".  

Example code:


 p {
 
  text-align: center;
  
  font-size: 20vh;

  animation-name: demo;
  
  animation-duration: 3s;
  
}



@keyframes demo {

  from {
  
  font-size: 0vh;
    
  }

  95% {
  
  font-size: 21vh;
    
  }

  to {
  
  font-size: 20vh;
    
  }
  
}

# Responsive Design

### CSS 'display' element

value | Meaning
------|--------
none | element exists, but is not displayed
block | display with a width that fills parent element
inline | display with a width that is only as big as content
flex | display children in flexible orientation
grid | display children in a grid orientation

### CSS 'float' element

> "The float css property moves an element to the left or right of its container element and allows inline elements to wrap around it"

### Media Queries

Can be used to change HTML depending on screen size and orientation

# CSS Grid

grid-template-columns: specify the layout of the grid's columns

grid-auto-rows: specify the height of rows

grid-gap: specify spacing between grid elements

# CSS Flex

the 'flex' property specifies how many units of space an element takes up

# CSS Frameworks

CSS Frameworks provide components that commonly appear in web applications for easy developing.

### Tailwind

> "Tailwind takes a different approach than traditional CSS frameworks. Instead of using large, rich, CSS rulesets to compartmentalize styling and functionality, it uses smaller definitions that are applied specifically to individual HTML elements. This moves much of the CSS representation out of the CSS file and directly into the HTML."

### Bootstrap

> "The reigning champion for CSS frameworks is Bootstrap. Bootstrap has been supported by an active and vibrant community for over a decade and contains many lessons learned from real world applications. The major downside of Bootstrap is its own success. Because it is so popular, Bootstrap defines the de facto look and feel of websites. This is great for user experience continuity, but it makes it difficult for a website to grab the attention of new users."

Too include Bootstrap in application:
> "npm install bootstrap@5.2.3"

# JavaScript Intro

JavaScript is the most used programming langauge in the world

Year |	Version	 |Features
----------------------
1997 ES1	types, functions

1999	ES3	regex, exceptions, switch

2009	ES5	json, array iteration

2015	ES6	let/const, default params, classes, template literals, destructuring, generators, promises, modules, internationalization

2016	ES2016	array.includes

2017	ES2017	async/await
2018	ES2018	rest/spread, promise.finally
2019	ES2019	string.trim
2020	ES2020	?? operator

# Adding JavsScript to HTML

Use "<script>" and include a src file.  Alternatively, code can be included without a src file.

# JavaScript Types and Constructs

Primitive Types:

Type	| Meaning
-----|--------
Null |	The type of a variable that has not been assigned a value.
Undefined |	The type of a variable that has not been defined.
Boolean |	true or false.
Number |	A 64-bit signed number.
BigInt |	A number of arbitrary magnitude.
String |	A textual sequence of characters.
Symbol |	A unique value.

Commonly Used Objects:

Type |	Use	| Example
----|-------|-------
Object |	A collection of properties represented by name-value pairs. Values can be of any type. |	{a:3, b:'fish'}
Function |	An object that has the ability to be called. |	function a() {}
Date |	Calendar dates and times.	| new Date('1995-12-17')
Array |	An ordered sequence of any type. |	[3, 'fish']
Map |	A collection of key-value pairs that support efficient lookups. |	new Map()
JSON |	A lightweight data-interchange format used to share information across programs. |	{"a":3, "b":"fish"}

# JavaScript Strings

> "A string variable is specified by surrounding a sequence of characters with single quotes ('), double quotes ("), or backticks (`). The meaning of single or double quotes are equivalent, but the backtick defines a string literal that may contain JavaScript that is evaluated in place and concatenated into the string. A string literal replacement specifier is declared with a dollar sign followed by a curly brace pair. Anything inside the curly braces is evaluated as JavaScript. You can also use backticks to create multiline strings without having to explicitly escape the newline characters using \n."

Common Functions:

Function |	Meaning
-------|--------
length |	The number of characters in the string
indexOf()	| The starting index of a given substring
split() |	Split the string into an array on the given delimiter string
startsWith()	| True if the string has a given prefix
endsWith() |	True if the string has a given suffix
toLowerCase() |	Converts all characters to lowercase

# JSON

> "JavaScript Object Notation (JSON) was conceived by Douglas Crockford in 2001 while working at Yahoo!"

> "JSON provides a simple, and yet effective way, to share and store data. By design JSON is easily convertible to, and from, JavaScript objects. This makes it a very convenient data format when working with web technologies. Because of its simplicity, standardization, and compatibility with JavaScript, JSON has become one of the world's most popular data formats."

A JSON document wil contain one data type: string, number, boolean, array, object, null, object.

The most common data type for JSON is an **object**, which is a key (string) value (any data type) pair.

Remember, curly braces are for objects, while square brackets are for arrays.  Strings always use double quotes.

You may convert JSON to JavaScrip using **JSON.parse** or **JSON.stringify**

# JavaScript Object and Classes

A JavaScript object is composed of name value pairs, named properties.  The name of a properity should be a String or Symbol.  Properties are referenced with a dot (e.g. obj.p) or brackets (e.g. obj[p]).

>"⚠ Note the different uses of the term object. Object can refer to the standard JavaScript objects (e.g. Promise, Map, Object, Function, Date, ...), or it can refer specifically to the JavaScript Object object (i.e. new Object()), or it can refer to any JavaScript object you create (e.g. {a:'a', b:2} ). This overloaded usage can be a bit confusing."

object functions:
Function |	Meaning
--------|--------
entries |	Returns an array of key value pairs
keys |	Returns an array of keys
values |	Returns an array of values

A function that returns an object is called a **constructor**.

Classes can be used to make several objects in a reusable fashion.  Classes should include a constructor.  You can make class properties and functions private with a **#** prefix.  Classes support inheritance (use the **extends** keyword and pass in parameters for the parent class using **super**).

# JavaScript Regular Expressions

"Regular expressions" are "textual pattern matchers."

Two ways to create a regular expression:

>const objRegex = new RegExp('ab*', 'i');

>const literalRegex = /ab*/i;

> "The string class has several functions that accept regular expressions. This includes match, replace, search, and split. For a quick test to see if there is a match you can use the regular expression object's test function."

# JavaScript Rest and Spread

## Rest

>"JavaScript provides the **rest** syntax to make this easier. Think of it as a parameter that contains the rest of the parameters. To turn the last parameter of any function into a rest parameter you prefix it with three periods. You can then call it with any number of parameters and they are all automatically combined into an array."

## Spread

Spread does the opposite of **rest**.  A list can be used as a parameter and will be split to fill all applicable parameters for the function.

# JavaScript Exceptions

Exception handling uses several keywords: **try**, **catch**, **throw**, **finally**.

**Throw**: causes an exception to occur

**Try**: executes normally unless an exception is thrown.  If an exception is thrown, code after the throw is ignored

**Catch**: code that runs if an exception is thrown

**finally**: code that always is called, regardless whether or not an exception is thrown

A fallback pattern is used for exception handling.  Put normal code into the try block, and fallback implementation in the catch block.

# JavaScript Destructuring

The process of pulling individual items out of an existing one.

Example:

> if **const a = [1, 2, 4, 5]**, then **const [b, c] = a** will equal [1, 2]
